# Stay green research of Wild Emmer and Emmer introgressed winter wheat hexaploid lines.
---
Temperature and relative humidity were recorded every 15min using a HOBO UX data logger and HOBO Marine Pendants (Onset, Bourne, MA). As a measure of the stay green trait, chlorophyll index was recorded using SPAD chlorophyll meter (Model 502 Plus, Konica Minolta, Germany). Measurements were taken on the 8th day post anthesis and every 4th day thereafter as the average of three readings across the ?ag leaf—distal, middle, and proximal to the junction of the collar and peduncle—until the end of senescence when a zero or negligible reading was obtained. All plants were harvested at maturity and height, grain number, grain weight, and thousand kernel weight were recorded for the primary tiller of each plant. 
The experimental design was a randomized complete block design (RCBD) constituting two environmental regimes of OT and HT having two replications per chamber such that the lines were each assigned a centrically randomized position per block with each block having 43 genotypes with KanMark placed twice for complete block of 44.

Each chamber in Exp. 1 contained 88 plants placed 44 per replicate and upon conclusion of the 8-day period post-anthesis plants were moved to one of four chambers, of which two treatment chambers had temperatures set by accumulating Kansas Mesonet data which was used to create seven diurnal profiles based on Viola Kansas temperatures for the years 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, and their average temperatures of the dates 5/22 to 6/3 which dictated the temperature  and ramp  for 32/19°C (day/night) heat stress (Kansas Mesonet, 2022). Control chambers were set diurnally similar with ideal growth conditions 15/22°C(day/night). Both control and treatment chambers were set for 70% relative humidity and a light regime that mirrored Viola Kansas Mesonet data (Kansas Mesonet, 2022).

Exp. 2 was composed of three chambers of which two were the same treatment chambers described for Exp. 1. The third chamber, set as the ideal growth troposphere, doubled as the vegetative growth setting for the population and a single control chamber, which contained two hydrospheric tubs each containing 88 plants in their own respective pedosphere. 

## Description of the data and file structure

Plant materials for this study consisted of 43 varieties of winter wheat sourced from the USDA-ARS Hard Winter Wheat Program (Manhattan, KS). Experiments evaluated the lines KanMark and KS090387K-20, which were used as parents in crosses with Emmer and wild Emmer, 26 lines of hexaploid BC1F5:7 lines derived from Emmer or wild Emmer accessions TA-1000, TA-1077 and TA74, 11 HWWAM Panel lines and 4 near isogenic (NIL) lines for the wheat streak mosaic virus resistance gene Wsm1. The germplasm origin information can be found within the complete data,

Utilizing climate-controlled chambers, 43 wheat genotypes were evaluated in two experiments. For both experiments, all germplasms were sown in four-inch pots filled with ProMix-BX general purpose growing medium (Premier Tech Growers and Consumers, a Business Unit of Premier Tech, Canada) in well-watered conditions at ~25/15°C Day/night temperatures until germination, and subsequently, vernalized at ~4°C for ~5 weeks. Vernalized seedlings were then transplanted individually to pots having a radius of approximately 10.16 cm and a depth of approximately 30.48 cm pots filled with the same growth medium and placed according to random assignment in a fertigated-water bin. Through the course of both experiments, plants were fertilized by Peters Professional (The Scotts Company, Marysville, OH) containing 10% Nitrogen (N), 20% Phosphorus (P), and 20% Potassium (K) at 20:10:20 4.93 ml per 3.79 L water per super block once a week commencing 3-days after transplant. All tubs were filled as needed to maintain fertigated water above the soil interface with a consistent nutrient concentration. All chambers were set for 70% relative humidity and a light regime 15hr light/9hr dark (day/night) that mirrored Viola Kansas Mesonet data (Kansas Mesonet, 2022.).

For Exp. 1, transplanted vegetative plants were located within the Kansas State University/USDA greenhouse 108A having daily average temperature regimes 23/19 °C (day/night) reported Appendix data. To control wheat thrips (Haplothrips tritici) and reduce copper deficiency syndromes of stunted growth and chlorosis, an adequate amount of Marathon (OHP, Inc., Mainland, PA), 108.43 ml per bin, and a 0.156-gram dose of copper per bin was applied 18 days after transplant to all bins respectively as advised by product. All plants remained in their transplanted positions until 8-days post-anthesis, at which time plants preselected for 1 of 4 chambers having OT and HT settings were moved to their new tropo and hydrosphere environments while continuing in their respective pedospheric environments.

For Exp. 2, during vegetative growth, plants were located within a single Kansas State University/USDA growth chamber having daily average temperature regimes 29.5/15.7°C (day/night). Additionally, to help ensure proper lodging and reduce copper deficiency syndromes of stunted growth and chlorosis, a single silicon application of Iron Chelate constituting 54.22 ml per bin approximately two-weeks after transplant and a 0.156-gram dose of copper per superblock 2 weeks after transplant was applied respectively as advised by product. Further, A fungicide treatment for powdery mildew consisting of one 0.5 gram per 7.57 L application of Strike 50 (OHP, Inc., Mainland, PA), and subsequent application of a 14.79 ml:14.79 ml:1 L concoction of Dawn Liquid Soap (Procter & Gamble, Cincinnati, OH) for leaf surface cohesion (surfactant), baking soda (sodium bicarbonate, NaHCO3) to increase the pH levels, and water as the universal solvent respectively, was applied as needed to maintain powdery mildew infection (Fallik et al., 1997). Upon conclusion of the 8-day period post-anthesis, plants selected for HT treatment were moved to one of 2 chambers set with the high temperature regime, and plants selected for the control treatment of OT remained in their respective positions. 
 
The experimental design was a randomized complete block design (RCBD) constituting two environmental regimes of OT and HT having two replications per chamber such that the lines were each assigned a centrically randomized position per block with each block having 43 genotypes with KanMark placed twice for complete block of 44.

Each chamber in Exp. 1 contained 88 plants placed 44 per replicate and upon conclusion of the 8-day period post-anthesis plants were moved to one of four chambers, of which two treatment chambers had temperatures set by accumulating Kansas Mesonet data which was used to create seven diurnal profiles based on Viola Kansas temperatures for the years 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, and their average temperatures of the dates 5/22 to 6/3 which dictated the temperature  and ramp  for 32/19°C (day/night) heat stress (Kansas Mesonet, 2022). Control chambers were set diurnally similar with ideal growth conditions 15/22°C(day/night). Both control and treatment chambers were set for 70% relative humidity and a light regime that mirrored Viola Kansas Mesonet data (Kansas Mesonet, 2022).

Exp. 2 was composed of three chambers of which two were the same treatment chambers described for Exp. 1. The third chamber, set as the ideal growth troposphere, doubled as the vegetative growth setting for the population and a single control chamber, which contained two hydrospheric tubs each containing 88 plants in their own respective pedosphere. 



## Sharing/Access information
N/A


## Code/Software
N/A
